SectionsTVFeaturedMore from NBC Follow NBC News WASHINGTON — Around this time just nine years ago, Rick Santorum won the Iowa caucuses; Mitt Romney took New Hampshire; and Newt Gingrich was the winner in South Carolina.And that came after Romney, Rick Perry, Michele Bachmann and Herman Cain had all taken turns as frontrunners for the GOP presidential nomination.We mention that campaign history from three presidential cycles ago, because it helps tell the story of how today’s Republican Party remains fractured between establishment vs. populist forces; between policies vs. confrontation; between reality vs. conspiracy theories; and by a record of just one presidential win in the last four cycles — Donald Trump’s in 2016.The GOP establishment won the battle (with Romney winning the nomination), but it lost the war.And here’s where that GOP presidential field is today:So if you want to try to make sense of Mitch McConnell vs. Marjorie Taylor Greene, or Matt Gaetz vs. Liz Cheney, it’s important to revisit the GOP’s history just a decade ago after the Bush presidency had ended.And it helps explain which side is winning.Yesterday, we wrote that Joe Biden’s choice on the Covid-19 relief bill is pretty simple: Go big and (pretty much) alone? Or go smaller with (some) GOP support?Well, after yesterday’s “frank” and “useful” meeting with GOP senators, it sure seems like Biden is continuing to focus on Door No. 1.“While there were areas of agreement, the president also reiterated his view that Congress must respond boldly and urgently, and noted many areas which the Republican senators' proposal does not address,” White House Press Secretary Jen Psaki said in a readout of yesterday’s meeting.“[Biden] reiterated that while he is hopeful that the Rescue Plan can pass with bipartisan support, a reconciliation package is a path to achieve that end,” Psaki added.Punxsutawney Phil predicts we're in for six more weeks of winter — then a lovely spring. #GroundhogDay https://t.co/WH4P79qHh1More than $31 million: The amount that former president Donald Trump’s Save America PAC raised in the last five weeks of 2020.About $217,000: How much of that $31 million the PAC actually spent.26,396,736: The number of confirmed cases of coronavirus in the United States, per the most recent data from NBC News and health officials. (That’s 113,922 more than yesterday morning.)444,981: The number of deaths in the United States from the virus so far. (That’s 2,157 more than yesterday morning.)93,536: The number of people currently hospitalized from Covid-19 in the United States.309.31 million: The number of coronavirus tests that have been administered in the United States so far, according to researchers at The COVID Tracking Project.At least 29.9 million: The number of Americans who have received one or both vaccine shots so far.1,324,949: The average number of individual shots per day since January 20 (7-day average)87: The number of days left for Biden to reach his 100-day vaccination goals.At 5:00 p.m. ET, President Biden signs executive actions on the subject of immigration, including one that creates a task force reuniting children who were separated from their parents during Donald Trump’s presidency. White House Press Secretary Jen Psaki briefs reporters at 1:30 p.m. ET.Chuck Schumer may be the Senate’s majority leader, but Democrats still don’t hold the gavels of several committees without an organizing resolution to determine a power sharing agreement in a 50-50 Senate.Sen. Dick Durbin, D-Ill., is poised to become the Senate Judiciary Committee chair, but since Sen. Lindsey Graham, R-S.C., still holds that position, President Biden’s attorney general nominee, Merrick Garland, hasn’t received a confirmation hearing. Durbin released this letter to Graham last night:“Following Judge Garland’s introduction as the nominee, my staff quickly sought to work with Republican Committee staff to map out a process that would provide sufficient time to review Judge Garland’s record while still swiftly advancing his nomination. As early as January 14 — just one week after then-President-elect Biden formally announced Judge Garland’s nomination — Committee staff had bipartisan, preliminary conversations laying out possible hearing dates and logistics. Those conversations have continued in earnest, yet we now encounter obstacles that needlessly delay the Committee’s consideration of an eminently qualified pick who has bipartisan support to lead the Justice Department.”Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell relented on his demand to include a filibuster-saving proposal in the agreement last week, but McConnell and Schumer have not moved forward in bring a resolution to the floor.Biden Cabinet WatchState: Tony Blinken (confirmed)Treasury: Janet Yellen (confirmed)Defense: Ret. Gen. Lloyd Austin (confirmed)Attorney General: Merrick GarlandHomeland Security: Alejandro MayorkasHHS: Xavier BecerraAgriculture: Tom VilsackTransportation: Pete ButtigiegEnergy: Jennifer GranholmInterior: Deb HaalandEducation: Miguel CardonaCommerce: Gina RaimondoLabor: Marty WalshHUD: Marcia FudgeVeterans Affairs: Denis McDonoughUN Ambassador: Linda Thomas-GreenfieldDirector of National Intelligence: Avril Haines (confirmed)EPA: Michael ReganSBA: Isabel GuzmanOMB Director: Neera TandenU.S. Trade Representative: Katherine TaiAndrew Jackson! Central banking! Pens! It’s the tale of the ONLY president ever censured by the United States Senate.Biden is expected to sign three major executive orders on immigration.There’s a wrinkle in the reconciliation process — it could trigger unintended cuts to Medicare.Mitch McConnell is weighing in on the big controversies brewing in the House GOP.A campaign autopsy from GOP pollster Tony Fabrizio shows that Trump’s loss was rooted in the pandemic, voter fatigue and dips among key demographic groups.Rahm Emanuel could be headed for an ambassadorship.What should Biden do about inspectors general chosen under the Trump administration?In an Instagram video, Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez described her experiences on January 6 and revealed that she’s a survivor of sexual assault.A progressive PAC wants to target Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema.The North Carolina Democratic Senate primary is getting crowded fast.And be sure to check out Bruce Mehlman’s latest presentation on our current political/economic/societal climate.Chuck Todd is moderator of "Meet The Press" and NBC News' political director. Mark Murray is a senior political editor at NBC News.Carrie Dann is a political editor for NBC News. Melissa Holzberg is a researcher for the NBC News political unit.© 2021 NBC UNIVERSAL