A Covid-19 vaccination centre at the Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles was forced to close for an hour on Saturday after protests by anti-vaccine and far-right groups, local media report. Around 50 protesters stalled motorists who had been waiting for hours.The demonstrators carried placards decrying the effectiveness of the vaccine.Protesters told people to "turn back", while one man shouted: "You're a lab rat", the Los Angeles Times reported.The Los Angeles Fire Department closed the entrance to the stadium around 14:00 local time (22:00 GMT) as a precaution.The Los Angeles Police Department tweeted that it "did NOT close the gates" to the stadium and all scheduled vaccines would be delivered.California Governor Gavin Newsom tweeted that that stadium was "back up and running"."This is completely wrong," German Jaquez, who had been waiting for a jab, told the Times. "I've been waiting for weeks to get an appointment. I am a dentist; I am taking a big risk being around patients. I want to be safe for my patients and for my family. The vaccine is the only way to beat the virus."We’re at the mass vaccination site at Dodger Stadium to get my mom the vaccine. The anti–vax protestors have approached the entrance to the site. The LAPD have now closed the gate. We have been sitting here for about half an hour. Nobody is moving. pic.twitter.com/GrJPA5wrqxA post on social media called the protest the "Scamdemic Protest/March"."This is a sharing information protest and march against everything COVID, Vaccine, PCR Tests, Lockdowns, Masks, Fauci, Gates, Newsom, China, digital tracking, etc." it said. Protesters carried placards with slogans including:  "Save Your Soul Turn Back Now", "CNN is lying to you", and "Take off your mask".The stadium was eventually reopened around an hour later. California has been one of the worst-hit states in the US, with around 3.2 million cases and more than 40,000 deaths. More than 439,000 people have lost their lives to the virus in the country.How do I know the Covid vaccine is safe?Call to stop anti-vaccination 'fake news''How my foot became anti-vaccine propaganda'House Republicans resist pressure to oust lawmakerMarjorie Taylor Greene's remarks were offensive but came before she was elected, a party leader says.World must ensure Myanmar coup fails - UN chiefCanada labels Proud Boys a terrorist entityMigrant girl held by US for 531 days and countingFact-checking President Macron's vaccine claimRacial Impostor Syndrome: When you feel like a fakeMedics fly in to answer Portugal's Covid emergencyHaunting images of America's painful past. VideoHaunting images of America's painful pastJailing Navalny may mean more problems for PutinSo what is Jeff Bezos going to do now? VideoSo what is Jeff Bezos going to do now?Is high-speed rail travel on a track to nowhere?South Korea's 'hidden' migrant workers. VideoSouth Korea's 'hidden' migrant workersFootball phrases15 sayings from around the worldUS country star dropped by label over racial slur1House Republicans resist pressure to oust lawmaker2Canada labels Proud Boys a terrorist entity3Harry Dunn suspect 'worked for US intelligence'4US apology over 'Chucky' missing child alert5World must ensure Myanmar coup fails - UN chief6Is high-speed rail travel on a track to nowhere?7MSPs reject calls for probe into Trump golf courses8Mariah Carey sued by sister over 'vindictive' book9Uighur camp detainees allege systematic rape10© 2021 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.