SectionsTVFeaturedMore from NBC Follow NBC News A major winter storm that has already left multiple people dead continued to pummel parts of the Northeast on Tuesday as snowfall forced airports to cancel flights and coronavirus vaccine sites to close.The Nor’easter has dumped 17.2 inches of snow on New York City's Central Park; 11.7 inches on Hartford, Connecticut; 6.1 inches on Philadelphia; 4.4 inches on Albany, New York; and 1.2 inches on Boston, according to NBC News meteorologist Bill Karins.Big Northeast snow totals: Top cities were forecasted well. #Boston and Philly were VERY difficult forecasts. Philly turned out as expected but Boston underachieved with rain & a degree or 2 too warm. pic.twitter.com/RSRVqxpFMONewton, New Jersey, recorded 32 inches, the highest total on the East Coast, he said. Nazareth, Pennsylvania, saw 31 inches and Harrison, New York, reported 24.5 inches.Highest snow totals by state #Noreaster2011 pic.twitter.com/w4wveDe20XThe National Weather Service predicts an additional foot or more could be on the ground in parts of New England by the time the snow finally tapers off in the northernmost states in the coming days. Travel is not recommended as the Weather Service warned of widespread heavy snow, gusty winds and coastal impacts that are not likely to wind down until Thursday.Maryland police said state troopers have answered about 1,800 calls and have responded to 505 crashes and 245 disabled or abandoned vehicles since Sunday. New Jersey Gov. Phil Murphy said during a news conference Tuesday that police responded to 743 accidents and 1,362 calls to assist motorists.A number of flights were canceled Tuesday at major airports, including 114 at John F. Kennedy International Airport, 97 at Newark Liberty International Airport and 82 at LaGuardia Airport."Expect major to extreme impacts across the region from Pennsylvania to Maine, including the Philadelphia, New York, and Boston metro areas," the Weather Service said in a statement Tuesday.The blizzard-like conditions have forced many states in the region to close coronavirus vaccination sites, delaying much needed vaccines.In Connecticut, Gov. Ned Lamont said the storm forced the postponement of about 10,000 shots and delayed the state's weekly resupply of vaccines.A state of emergency imposed by New Jersey Gov. Murphy remained in effect and the state's six mega sites for Covid-19 vaccines were closed as plow operators worked. Vaccination appointments were canceled and rescheduled in Rhode Island and New York, too.New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio said Tuesday during a news conference that the "vast majority of it is over." He cautioned New Yorkers to avoid driving as sanitation workers continue to clear the roads."If you don't need to be driving on the road, please don't," de Blasio said.He added that subway service would resume operations with some delays.Schools in New York City were closed for a second day on Tuesday and not expected to reopen until Wednesday, he said.Download the NBC News app for breaking news and politicsSo far, seven people have died during the storm.In Allentown, Pennsylvania, a 67-year-old woman with Alzheimer’s disease died of hypothermia after wandering away from her home, NBC Philadelphia reported. Her body was found four blocks away on Monday morning.In Adamstown, Maryland, a 64-year-old man died after a recycling services truck he was riding on the back of overturned on an icy roadway around noon Monday, the Frederick County Sheriff’s Office said.And two people — a 69-year-old woman and a 42-year-old woman — died in Pennsylvania in separate incidents on Sunday, state police said. The 42-year-old woman died in a crash during the snowstorm in Tioga County, and the other 69-year-old crashed in slick conditions during snow in Bucks County.The Associated Press reported three others, including a married couple in Luzerne County, Pennsylvania, were killed after a dispute over snow removal. The suspect was later found dead with what authorities believe was a self-inflicted wound, according to the AP.Adela Suliman is a London-based reporter for NBC News Digital. Wilson Wong is a breaking news reporter with NBC News. © 2021 NBC UNIVERSAL