Utilizamos cookies, próprios e de terceiros, que o reconhecem e identificam como um usuário único, para garantir a melhor experiência de navegação, personalizar conteúdo e anúncios, e melhorar o desempenho do nosso site e serviços.
Esses Cookies nos permitem coletar alguns dados pessoais sobre você, como sua ID exclusiva atribuída ao seu dispositivo, endereço de IP, tipo de dispositivo e navegador, conteúdos visualizados ou outras ações realizadas usando nossos serviços, país e idioma selecionados, entre outros. Para saber mais sobre nossa política de cookies, acesse link.

Caso não concorde com o uso cookies dessa forma, você deverá ajustar as configurações de seu navegador ou deixar de acessar o nosso site e serviços. Ao continuar com a navegação em nosso site, você aceita o uso de cookies.As of Jan. 15, there are more than 2,700 bodies being stored at Los Angeles hospitals and the Coroner's Office.By
      
        Mary Ann Georgantopoulos

    Posted on January 18, 2021, at 2:26 p.m. ET
    Elizabeth "Liz" Napoles (right) works alongside National Guard members helping to place the bodies of those who died from COVID-19 into temporary storage at the LA County Medical Examiner-Coroner's Office, Jan. 12.The journalists at BuzzFeed News are proud to bring you trustworthy and relevant reporting about the coronavirus. To help keep this news free, become a member and sign up for our newsletter, Incoming.Los Angeles County officials have temporarily lifted environmental limits on the number of cremations allowed to accommodate the growing backlog of deaths due to COVID-19.Permits for crematoriums contain limits on the number of human remains that may be cremated each month "based on potential air quality impacts," the South Coast Air Quality Management District (AQMD) said in a press release Sunday. But as a result of the coronavirus, the current death rate in the region is double what it was before the pandemic, resulting in a large backlog of bodies at hospitals, funeral homes, and crematoriums.Following requests from the county coroner and health department, the AQMD issued an order suspending the limits on cremations.According to the order, as of Jan. 15, there are more than 2,700 bodies being stored at hospitals and the Coroner's Office, and the 28 crematories in the county have the resources to perform more cremations without the regulatory limits.The latest surge of the virus has been devastating to the Los Angeles area. To date, more than 1 million have been diagnosed with COVID-19, according to LA Public Health, and nearly 14,000 people have died.Earlier this month in Los Angeles, hospitals were running dangerously low on oxygen and other supplies, with some critically ill patients having to wait up to eight hours in ambulances before getting into emergency rooms.The cremation order is in place for 10 days but may be extended as, according to the order, the coroner "anticipates that another surge is approaching as a result of the New Year’s holiday, since deaths tend to occur 4-6 weeks after gatherings, andthe capacity of the decedent management system, including hospitals, funeral homes, crematoria and the Coroner’s office is being exceeded."Mary Ann Georgantopoulos is a reporter for BuzzFeed News and is based in New York.Contact Mary Ann Georgantopoulos at maryann.georgantopoulos@buzzfeed.com.Got a confidential tip? Submit it here.Want to see more stories like this? Become a BuzzFeed News member.OopsLooks like your browser doesn't support JavaScript.